The end of programming as we know it was
an article written by Tim O'Reilly
almost about a year ago and there were a
lot of interesting ideas discussed in
that and so it's always nice to kind of
look back at things. I think a lot of
people only look forward, but it's good
to look back in time and look at how
people were talking about things, you
know, even just a year ago and kind of
seeing where we're at today because a
lot of the claims made in that article
were the overall thesis was that
programming has changed. The way we did
programming before is different. It's
over. But programming has still not gone
away. It's going to just be different
going forward. And I think given that a
year has passed, so much more progress
has been made in the last year than I
would have anticipated. So I just want
to say that I was definitely wrong about
certain things, certain assessments that
I made. Now, in fairness, nobody can
precisely predict the future. If you're
going to make predictions, you're going
to be wrong at some point. And I am not
here to like win an argument. I'm not
pro AI or against AI. I just prefer to
be in touch with reality. And for me,
reality doesn't mean hopping on the
bandwagon that everybody else is on.
Because we know that about a year and a
half ago when everybody was saying that
cursor and a lot of these tools are
making them 10x developers or 100x
developers now. It was just full of BS.
It was just not true. And so I pointed
out, at least for me, that was just not
true. That was not my reality. But right
now, I think I see some people overly
dismissive of AI just because we know
that the boy has cried wolf over and
over again. Why should you believe it
now? Well, let me just say it's just my
opinion, but I think in November of last
year, there was definitely an inflection
point. We got to a point where I
realized that well, okay, even if AI
doesn't get any better from here, things
will never be the same again. But what
does that actually mean? Because I would
say right now, we're still at the point
where like programming has changed, but
it still hasn't gone away. And honestly,
if I had to bet money, I think a year
from now, we're going to be in the exact
same boat. We're going to say
programming has changed dramatically,
maybe even more so, but still it still
involves a lot of human input. It still
involves a lot of human understanding
not just of the concepts of like how to
use an agent how you know the learning
curve of using something like clawed
code which you know my humble opinion
I'm not an expert on using them but I
think you get most of the value out of
using these tools pretty quickly and the
rest of the value that you get like it
involves knowing how to code because you
kind of have to know what you can get
away with when you're using the AI tools
like, okay, you can implement certain
things and certain things that you can't
and certain things to double check and
certain things that you can maybe gloss
over, but that requires understanding
how to code even if you don't
necessarily handype your code anymore,
which I guess most people aren't doing
anymore. I'm certainly not handwriting
very much code anymore, and I see that
many experienced engineers are also
doing the exact same. So when you see
that online, when you see that nobody's
writing code anymore, it can kind of
make you think that coding, knowing how
to code, knowing how to read code isn't
important anymore. But I definitely do
not think that's the case right now. If
I just had to guess, I don't think
that's going to be the case a year from
now. Because when we're talking about
the idea of AGI, the idea of the
singularity, the idea of the cure to
cancer, the infinite computations,
philosophically at least, like it almost
feels like we're trying to get closer
and closer to like God or like the God
particle or like the origin of
intelligence or, you know, from a math
perspective, like a neutral analogy
would be we're getting closer and closer
to infinity. But you know that infinity
is like an idea. The closer you get to
it, you realize you're the same distance
away from it. So I know that's kind of a
strange analogy. It's not going to win
an argument for me or anything, but you
have to understand that what we're
trying to do with this AI is exactly
that. We're trying to create a general
form of intelligence, whether it's
coding intelligence or some other
intelligence, so that it can do pretty
much everything. And if it can't do
everything, it's definitely going to
require human input. Another, I guess,
analogy you could say, if you actually
take a second to think about like the
current state of programming, like I
said, over the last 3 months, things
have drastically changed. And it's not
even clear how much things have changed
until you actually continue to use and
use a lot of the AI tools. Because even
for me, like I had that moment in
November and even in December where I
realized, wow, like these tools are
better than I would have expected. In
the past, it was the reverse. Every time
I used it, I was like, who who the hell
is hyping this? Because I'm trying to
use it in my codebase. It ain't doing
what everybody says it should be doing.
But right now, it's doing more than you
might expect. But at the same time, if
you would have told me that this is
where we would be at three years ago or
even a year ago, I would have thought
that it would feel different than it
does, right? And if that doesn't make
sense, think about this even further
back. like 20 years ago if somebody told
you if you're working on some company I
I don't know exactly what things were
like 20 years ago but you know it was
kind of distributed systems were getting
really really big right and if somebody
would have told you that actually 10
years from now you know 2015 2020 we're
going to have cloud providers and AWS I
think they launched in 2006 or something
it's not just going to give you VMs it's
going to give you pretty much everything
you could possibly need the the concept
of scaling databases and having like
autoscaling and even the cost aspect of
it like pay per use and all these things
if somebody would have told you that
this is the future this is what the
world is going to look like you know I
certainly would have thought that
probably there's going to be a lot less
programmers right like that sounds like
you're taking a lot of the hard parts
out of programming there's probably
going to be a lot less programmers we're
probably going to be shipping so quickly
the world is going to look something
like a utopia. We're going to have, you
know, so much value being created in
every direction. And it's it's really
not the case. I don't know. Is it the
hydonic treadmill? Have we gotten used
to it? Are we just over consuming? And
you know, what is it? I don't know what
exactly it is, but clearly it wasn't
like that before the AI stuff happened.
And so now going from, you know, late
2022 to the beginning of 2026, if
somebody told you that AI is going to
get this much better in such a short
period of time, you would say that if
coding is a solved problem, which I
don't know if you could exactly make
that argument, but you could make
something of an argument that coding,
not development, designing, and all that
sort of stuff, but if you can be
specific specific enough with your words
of what you're trying to accomplish
which usually it's going to take a
programmer to do that then the code will
write itself because that's what I mean
when I say we hit an inflection point
that if you have a really really
specific design doc for example you kind
of generally say that okay the these are
the design decisions I want to make this
is the type of queries I want to run
these are the access patterns this is
the architecture this is the API
interface and stuff like that you you
give these things to claude or some
other tool I'm not I'm not promoting
Claude or anything, but if you give it
to Codeex even, it's pretty much just
going to crank that thing out for you.
Okay. So So why isn't the world a utopia
yet? That's what I asked myself. Where
is the cure to cancer? Why can't we find
it? Because like I said towards the
beginning, the closer you get to
infinity, it's like deceptive. You're
still the same distance away from it,
right? And it's like the hydonic
treadmill. You'd think that at this
point, humanity, we've solved, we've
nearly solved life. We have abundant
food. We have food, water, and shelter.
But certain things just have not
changed. And I know this is kind of a
wacky philosophical argument. Fine. But
I I still think it's relevant because
like I said, okay, imagine a year from
now, let's say not just coding, but
actually software development is a
solved problem. Nobody is developing
anymore. Okay, mass unemployment. But
what is that world going to look like? I
don't think it's going to feel that
different than today. And I also don't
think we're we're going to get to that
either. I don't think we're going to
recreate intelligence. I don't think
we're going to recreate God. I think
those are the two hardest problems in
the universe. Understanding the origin
of life and consciousness and
understanding the origin of the
universe. And obviously uh everybody has
their own personal beliefs about stuff
like that. But I think those two
questions are pretty much the same
question, right? At least in my humble
opinion. And so when we get to AGI and
this kind of this god intelligence, the
singularity and stuff, I think things
just start to break down. I don't think
the question even makes sense anymore.
So anyways, concretely, what does this
actually mean? At least my opinion. You
can take it for you can take it however
you want. The short answer is I I
genuinely have no idea and nobody has
any idea. You don't have any idea. I I
don't think it makes sense to even try
to get overly precise with trying to
predict what's going to happen in the
future because you you won't be able to
predict it. 5 years ago, Meta thought
the metaverse was going to be the big
thing. It wasn't. You can never predict
that. 10, 20 years ago, even if you knew
social media was going to get bigger and
bigger, would you have predicted that
people are going to move away from text
posts to image-based posts and then from
that they're going to go to like stories
and from that they're going to go to
short form videos and stuff. You can
never predict these sorts of trends. So,
I know that the only question many
people want answered is what the hell is
going to happen? I just want to know if
I should be studying this or not, or I
just want to know if I should switch
careers or not. And I just don't have a
really good answer to that. I mean, I
can tell you how I approach it and how
I'm thinking about this and how I'm
seeing other people that I respect and
other smart people thinking about this.
They and myself are not trying to
predict the future. They just have a
certain way that they choose to live
their life and they're living it. And
I'm kind of of the same mindset that I
have a bias where I just like to be
really really intense and just go really
hard. And so when I was in a position
where maybe some of you are in that
position today when I was in 2022 when I
had quit my job at Amazon and I was very
low you know I was crying a lot. I
didn't know what was going to happen. I
felt very dumb. I didn't think I was
even ever going to be able to have any
sort of white collar job. You know, with
the pandemic that was happening, I
didn't know if a job was even going to
exist. I didn't know if I was ever going
to have another interview again. There
was just so much uncertainty. All I
really wanted was the certainty of that,
okay, if I just followed this plan,
everything is going to work itself out.
Things are going to go great. All I
really wanted was the certainty. I
didn't even want the highest paying job.
I would have taken any job. I just
wanted some level of predictability. But
when that's taken away from you and you
really don't have a good way of getting
it back, what do you do? How do you live
life? Like, what kind of mindset do you
even have that's going to get you
through the day? That's going to get you
to tomorrow and the day after that and
the day after that. How do you do it? I
can only speak for myself because
obviously it's a personal thing, but
this was my attitude. You know how a lot
of people people like gambling? People
like uncertainty. Actually, when you
open up your phone, that's the best part
about it. You never know what you're
going to find on social media. If you
knew exactly what you were going to
find, you probably wouldn't open it as
frequently. People like the the, you
know, scroll, the new post, new reel.
What are you going to get? And sometimes
it's not good. And sometimes it is good
and you get that dopamine hit. Well, you
can get the exact same thing from
something called thinking. Okay, I'm not
being condescending here, but when you
think, when you try and you don't really
know where you're where you're even
going, what direction you're going, but
you know, you're just trying your best
and you know what you're going to do.
You know what the input is going to be,
but you don't know what the output is
going to be. The brain is like a
unpredictable machine. It's not a
deterministic machine. You know, you you
throw some voltage into that. You
concentrate really hard. You start
getting little thoughts, right? And
let's be honest, if your brain is
anything like mine, most of those
thoughts are going to be pretty stupid.
They're going to be pretty bad thoughts,
but you're going to keep thinking once
in a while. You're going to get some
good thoughts in there. And you might
even get some good thoughts that nobody
else has had before. What I'm trying to
say is that on some level, you can
embrace the uncertainty. the mindset
that I chose through all my panic and
all the, you know, there there was a lot
going on honestly in my personal life at
that point, which we won't get into.
Ain't nobody got time for that. But I I
just said to myself, you know what? I
don't really care anymore. I I don't
know what's going to happen. I couldn't
even remember who I was at that point.
Like my memory was just like Anyways, I
won't get into that, but I just said to
myself, you know what? whatever happens,
what do I want to do? Like, h how do I
want to choose to live my life? And I
just said, well, at the very least, I
want to try. Even if I fail, even if I
fail, even if I starve to death, at
least I'm going to do it doing my best
because I just want to prove. I just
want to see what I'm capable of. I want
to see the heights that I can reach. And
I'm not scared anymore. I'm not scared
of failing because I already accepted
that in this moment right now. If if
you're struggling or if you don't have a
job or whatever your issue is, you're
you're already in the fail mode. Let's
say you've already failed. So, what are
you scared of? It might seem like I'm
trying to hype you up to to say, "Well,
screw it. Just be the best programmer
that you can be." I'm not necessarily
trying to tell anybody how to live their
life. Everyone has their own
circumstances. But this attitude that
I've seen a lot of, which is the most
self-defeating attitude, which is just
this constant anxiety, this constant
dread where you don't really know what's
going to happen. You know, you have to
ask yourself, what's that getting you?
You're not getting anywhere by thinking
like that. It's just making you feel
worse. So, if that's how you want to
live your life, that's fine. But when I
look around, those people are the most
unhappy. the people that still have some
anxiety like myself and other people,
but they're just living their life.
They're living it one day at a time.
They are living it how they choose to
live by doing the things that they
enjoy. The people who enjoy programming
and still feel like they're being
valuable as programmers. They're doing
that. I'm certainly doing that. Like I
said, like look at the business that I'm
in. I'm in the business of coding
interviews. That thing can just change
overnight. It's been the case that, you
know, everybody's been saying coding
interviews are going to go away. You
don't think I had any sort of anxiety
about that? Of course I did. But I
didn't really care that much because
even if it goes away, that's not my
identity. Coding uh interviews or even
programming or even some of these other
things, my identity is that, you know,
I'm going to sit down and I'm going to
compete with anybody because life isn't
a competition. I know that's like a
toxic way to view things, but it kind of
is a competition. And if you're willing
to outwork other people, which is how I
get a lot of my gratification from that,
I'll tell you straight up. People always
say you shouldn't compare yourself to
other people. Just compare yourself to
yourself. I do that, too. You know, I
I'm into self-improvement, but you know,
beating somebody else, there's a certain
gratification you get from that. And
when I see people with the attitude of
panic and fear and anxiety, well, at
first I feel bad for them because I used
to be in their same shoes and I know
it's not always easy to kind of get
through that. But I sincerely think I
could compete with anybody. And I think
really anyone can. I think at each level
that you're willing to do the things
that other people aren't, you separate
yourself from an entire class of people.
You do that again and again. you only
really need to do it like three or four
times in life and all of a sudden you're
at like a level that is very hard for
other people to touch. If you have
anxiety or some kind of uncertainty, at
least try to point it in the right
direction. At least try to make those
feelings and that energy work for you
rather than against you. Don't be
paralyzed in fear. And I know that's
easier said than done, but trust me when
I say that I followed the exact same
advice that I'm telling you. And this is
where it got me. It got me to a point
where I have a lot of skills that I
would have never never imagined. I would
have never even chose to learn them. And
I don't think there's anything special
about me. I really think anybody can do